imbalanced data post (#20)
mlr-org/mlr3gallery: content/post/imbalanced_data.Rmd

---
title: mlr3 imbalanced data
author: Giuseppe Casalicchio
date: '2020-03-30'
slug: mlr3-imbalanced
categories: []
tags: ['mlr3', 'mlr3pipelines', 'mlr3tuning', 'tuning', 'OpenML']
packages: ['OpenML', 'mlr3', 'mlr3learners', 'mlr3pipelines', 'mlr3tuning', 'mlr3viz']
---

# Intro 

This use case compares different approaches to handle class imbalancy for the [`optdigits`](https://www.openml.org/d/980) binary classification data set using the mlr3 package. 
We mainly focus on undersampling the majority class, oversampling the minority class, and the smote imbalancy correction that enriches the minority class with synthetic data. 

> The use case requires prior knowledge in basic ML concepts (e.g., issues imbalanced data, hyperparameter tuning, nested cross-validation) and `mlr3`, `mlr3pipelines` and `mlr3tuning` is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The use case requires prior knowledge in basic ML concepts (issues imbalanced data, hyperparameter tuning, nested cross-validation).
The R packages `mlr3`, `mlr3pipelines` and `mlr3tuning` will be used.
```

> You can find most of the content here also in the [mlr3book](https://mlr3book.mlr-org.com/) explained in a more detailed way.

Reviewer: Maybe link to a dedicated section?

These steps are performed:

* Retrieve data sets from `OpenML`

> * Define imbalancy correction pipelines (undersampling, oversampling and smote) with `mlr3pipelines`  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Define imbalance correction pipelines (undersampling, oversampling and smote) with `mlr3pipelines`
```

> * Combine pipeline with a learner and autotune it with `mlr3tuning`

Reviewer: In written form we usually use the term "Graph" (wrapped object of multiple pipelines operations) instead of "pipeline".

> * Benchmark the autotuned pipelines and visualize the results using `mlr3viz`

Reviewer: Same as above

# Prerequisites

## Loading required packages

```{r}
library("mlr3")          # mlr3 base package
library("mlr3misc")      # contains some helper functions
library("mlr3pipelines") # create ML pipelines
library("mlr3tuning")    # tuning ML algorithms
library("mlr3learners")  # additional ML algorithms
library("mlr3viz")       # autoplot for benchmarks
library("paradox")       # hyperparameter space
library("OpenML")        # to obtain data sets
library("smotefamily")   # smote algorithm for imbalancy correction
```

## Retrieve data sets from OpenML

> OpenML.org is an open machine learning platform, which allows users to share data, code and machine learning experiments.

Reviewer: Hyperlink?

> The OpenML R package can query available data sets and download them directly from within an R session:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenML R package can query available data sets using a filter-like approach by providing desired dataset characteristics like `number.of.classes` or `number.of.features`.
```

```{r}
# get list of curated binary classification data sets (see https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.03731v2) 
ds = listOMLDataSets(
  number.of.classes = 2, 
  number.of.features = c(1, 100), 
  number.of.instances = c(5000, 10000)
)
# select imbalanced data sets (without categorical features as smote cannot handle them)
ds = subset(ds, minority.class.size/number.of.instances < 0.2 & number.of.symbolic.features == 1)
ds

# pick one data set from list above 
d = getOMLDataSet(980)
d
```

After downloading the chosen data set, we create an `mlr3` classification task:

```{r}
# make sure target is a factor and create mlr3 tasks 
data = as.data.frame(d)
data[[d$target.features]] = as.factor(data[[d$target.features]])
task = TaskClassif$new(id = d$desc$name, backend = data, target = d$target.features)
task
```

Quick overview of the data:
```{r}
skimr::skim(data)
```

> ## Imbalancy correction

Reviewer: Isn't the correct term "imbalance"? I can't find the word "Imbalancy" at all.

  reference = "minor", shuffle = FALSE, ratio = 5)
table(po_over$train(list(task))$output$truth()) # enrich minority class by factor 5

# smote enriches the minority class with synthetic data
po_smote = po("smote", dup_size = 5)
table(po_smote$train(list(task))$output$truth()) # enrich minority class by factor (dup_size + 1)
```

## Construct `AutoTuner`

We combine the `PipeOp`s with a learner (here `ranger`) to make each pipeline behave like a learner:

```{r}
# create random forest learner
lrn = lrn("classif.ranger", num.trees = 50)

# combine learner with pipeline
lrn_under = GraphLearner$new(po_under %>>% lrn)
lrn_over = GraphLearner$new(po_over %>>% lrn)
lrn_smote = GraphLearner$new(po_smote %>>% lrn)
```

We define the search space in order to tune the hyperparameters of the class imbalancy methods. 

```{r}
# define parameter search space for each method
ps_under = ParamSet$new(list(ParamDbl$new("undersample.ratio", lower = 1/5, upper = 1)))
ps_over = ParamSet$new(list(ParamDbl$new("oversample.ratio", lower = 1, upper = 5)))
ps_smote = ParamSet$new(list(
  ParamInt$new("smote.dup_size", lower = 1, upper = 5),
  ParamInt$new("smote.K", lower = 2, upper = 6)
))
```

> We use `AutoTuner` to tune the pipeline (random forest learner + imbalancy correction method) based on a 3-fold CV using the `classif.fbeta` as performance measure. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We create an `AutoTuner` class from the learner to tune the graph (random forest learner + imbalancy correction method) based on a 3-fold CV using the `classif.fbeta` as performance measure. 
```

> To keep computational runtime low, we define the search space only for the imbalacy correction method. However, one can also jointly tune the hyperparameter of the learner along with the imbalancy correction method by extending the search space with the learner's hyperparameters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep runtime low, we define the search space only for the imbalacy correction method. 
However, one can also jointly tune the hyperparameter of the learner along with the imbalancy correction method by extending the search space with the learner's hyperparameters. 
```

> Note that SMOTE has two hyperparameters `K` and `dup_size`. 

Reviewer: Why upper case here?

While `K` changes the behavior of the SMOTE algorithm, `dup_size` will affect oversampling rate. 

> To focus on the effect of the oversampling rate on the performance, we will consider SMOTE with K = 1 as a different imbalacy correction method as SMOTE with K=2 (and so on).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To focus on the effect of the oversampling rate on the performance, we will consider SMOTE with K = 1 as a different imbalacy correction method as SMOTE with K = 2 (and so on).
```

Hence, we use grid search with 5 different hyperparameter configurations for the undersampling method, the oversampling method and each SMOTE variant for tuning:

```{r}
# define the 
inner_cv3 = rsmp("cv", folds = 3)
measure = msr("classif.fbeta")

learns = list(
  AutoTuner$new(
    learner = lrn_under,
    resampling = inner_cv3,
    measures = measure,
    tune_ps = ps_under,
    terminator = term("none"),
    tuner = tnr("grid_search", resolution = 5)
  ),
  AutoTuner$new(
    learner = lrn_over,
    resampling = inner_cv3,
    measures = measure,
    tune_ps = ps_over,
    terminator = term("none"),
    tuner = tnr("grid_search", resolution = 5)
  ),
  AutoTuner$new(
    learner = lrn_smote,
    resampling = inner_cv3,
    measures = measure,
    tune_ps = ps_smote,
    terminator = term("none"),
    tuner = tnr("grid_search", resolution = 5)
  )
)
names(learns) = mlr3misc::map(learns, "id")
names(learns) 
```

## Benchmark `AutoTuner`

> The `AutoTuner` is a fully tuned pipeline that behaves like a usual learner. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `AutoTuner` is a fully tuned graph that behaves like a usual learner. 
```

> For the tuning, we used 3-fold CV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the tuning a 3-fold CV is used.
```

Now, we use the `benchmark` function to compare the tuned class imbalancy pipelines based on a holdout for the outer evaluation:

```{r}
# NOTE: This code runs about 3 minutes
outer_resampling = rsmp("holdout")
design = benchmark_grid(
  tasks = task,
  learners = learns,
  resamplings = outer_resampling
)
print(design)

set.seed(1)

> # future::plan("multiprocess")

Reviewer: either remove or explain the future call

bmr = benchmark(design, store_models = TRUE)
```

### Visualize benchmark results

```{r}
bmr$aggregate(measure)
autoplot(bmr, measure = measure) # one value per boxplot since we used holdout as outer resampling 
```

### Visualize the tuning path

With `store_models = TRUE` we allow the `benchmark` function to store each single model that was computed during tuning. 
Therefore, we can plot the tuning path of the best learner from the subsampling iterations:

```{r}
library(ggplot2)
utune_path = bmr$data$learner[[1]]$archive("params")
utune_gg = ggplot(utune_path, aes(x = undersample.ratio, y = classif.fbeta)) +
  geom_point(size = 3) + 
  geom_line() + ylim(0.9, 1)

otune_path = bmr$data$learner[[2]]$archive("params")
otune_gg = ggplot(otune_path, aes(x = oversample.ratio, y = classif.fbeta)) +
  geom_point(size = 3) + 
  geom_line() + ylim(0.9, 1)

stune_path = bmr$data$learner[[3]]$archive("params")
stune_gg = ggplot(stune_path, aes(x = smote.dup_size, y = classif.fbeta, col = factor(smote.K))) +
  geom_point(size = 3) + 
  geom_line() + ylim(0.9, 1)

library(ggpubr)
ggarrange(utune_gg, otune_gg, stune_gg, common.legend = TRUE, nrow = 1) 
```

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: Maybe one or two sentences about the results (plots)?

---
title: mlr3 imbalanced data
author: Giuseppe Casalicchio
date: '2020-03-30'
slug: mlr3-imbalanced
categories: []
tags: ['mlr3', 'mlr3pipelines', 'mlr3pipelines', 'basics', 'visualization']

> packages: ['mlr3', 'mlr3learners', 'mlr3pipelines', 'mlr3tuning']

Reviewer 2: Perhaps list all packages used like `OpenML`, `smotefamily`...

---

# Intro 

This use case compares different approaches to handle class imbalancy for the [`optdigits`](https://www.openml.org/d/980) binary classification data set using the mlr3 package. 
We mainly focus on undersampling the majority class, oversampling the minority class, and the smote imbalancy correction that enriches the minority class with synthetic data. 
The use case requires prior knowledge in basic ML concepts (e.g., issues imbalanced data, hyperparameter tuning, nested cross-validation) and `mlr3`, `mlr3pipelines` and `mlr3tuning` is required.

> You can find most of the content here also in the [mlr3book](https://mlr3book.mlr-org.com/) in a more detailed way.

Reviewer 2: Consider

"...explained in a more detailed way."

> The steps are performed:

Reviewer 2: Consider

"The steps performed" or "These steps are performed""

* Retrieve data sets from `OpenML`
* Define imbalancy correction pipelines (undersampling, oversampling and smote) with `mlr3pipelines`  
* Combine pipeline with a learner and autotune it with `mlr3tuning`
* Benchmark the autotuned pipelines and visualize the results using `mlr3viz`

# Prerequisites

## Loading required packages

```{r}
library("mlr3")          # mlr3 base package
library("mlr3misc")      # contains some helper functions

> library("mlr3measures")  # lots of performance measures

Reviewer 2: I would avoid this line. See readme: https://github.com/mlr-org/mlr3measures

It does not clash with calls in this post but it is recommended practice.

library("mlr3pipelines") # create ML pipelines
library("mlr3tuning")    # tuning ML algorithms
library("mlr3learners")  # additional ML algorithms
library("mlr3viz")       # autoplot for benchmarks
library("paradox")       # hyperparameter space
library("OpenML")        # to obtain data sets
library("smotefamily")   # smote algorithm for imbalancy correction
```

## Retrieve data sets from OpenML

OpenML.org is an open machine learning platform, which allows users to share data, code and machine learning experiments.
The OpenML R package can query available data sets and download them directly from within an R session:

```{r}
# get list of curated binary classification data sets (see https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.03731v2) 

> ds = listOMLDataSets(

Reviewer 2: From first glance I like your package.

  number.of.classes = 2, 
  number.of.features = c(1, 100), 
  number.of.instances = c(5000, 10000)
)
# select imbalanced data sets (without categorical features as smote cannot handle them)
ds = subset(ds, minority.class.size/number.of.instances < 0.2 & number.of.symbolic.features == 1)
ds

# pick one data set from list above 
d = getOMLDataSet(980)
d
```

After downloading the chosen data set, we create an `mlr3` classification task:

```{r}
# make sure target is a factor and create mlr3 tasks 
data = as.data.frame(d)
data[[d$target.features]] = as.factor(data[[d$target.features]])
task = TaskClassif$new(id = d$desc$name, backend = data, target = d$target.features)
task
```

Quick overview of the data:
```{r}
skimr::skim(data)
```

## Imbalancy correction

> In `mlr3pipelines`, there is a `classbalancing` and a `smote` pipe operator that can be combined with any learner. 

Reviewer 2: Consider adding links when mentioning for the post relevant functions 

In `mlr3pipelines`, there is a [`classbalancing`](https://mlr3pipelines.mlr-org.com/reference/mlr_pipeops_classbalancing.html) and a [`smote` ](https://mlr3pipelines.mlr-org.com/reference/mlr_pipeops_smote.html) pipe operator that can be combined with any learner.

  reference = "minor", shuffle = FALSE, ratio = 5)
table(po_over$train(list(task))$output$truth()) # enrich minority class by factor 5

# smote enriches the minority class with synthetic data
po_smote = po("smote", dup_size = 5)
table(po_smote$train(list(task))$output$truth()) # enrich minority class by factor (dup_size + 1)
```

## Construct `AutoTuner`

We combine the `PipeOp`s with a learner (here `ranger`) to make each pipeline behave like a learner:

```{r}
# create random forest learner
lrn = lrn("classif.ranger", num.trees = 50)

# combine learner with pipeline
lrn_under = GraphLearner$new(po_under %>>% lrn)
lrn_over = GraphLearner$new(po_over %>>% lrn)
lrn_smote = GraphLearner$new(po_smote %>>% lrn)
```

We define the search space in order to tune the hyperparameters of the class imbalancy methods:

```{r}
# define parameter search space for each method
ps_under = ParamSet$new(list(ParamDbl$new("undersample.ratio", lower = 1/5, upper = 1)))
ps_over = ParamSet$new(list(ParamDbl$new("oversample.ratio", lower = 1, upper = 5)))
ps_smote = ParamSet$new(list(
  ParamInt$new("smote.dup_size", lower = 1, upper = 5),
  ParamInt$new("smote.K", lower = 1, upper = 5)
))
```

> We use `AutoTuner` to tune the pipeline (random forest learner + imbalancy correction method) based on a 3-fold CV using the `classif.f_score` as performance measure. 

Reviewer 2: [`classif.fbeta`](https://mlr3measures.mlr-org.com/reference/fbeta.html)

As we defined the search space only for the imbalacy correction method, we will only tune their hyperparameter to keep the computational runtime low.
However, we could also jointly tune the hyperparameter of the learner along with the imbalancy correction method. 
We use grid search with 8 different hyperparameter configurations:

```{r}
# define the 
inner_cv3 = rsmp("cv", folds = 3)

> measure = msr("classif.f_score")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`measure = msr("classif.fbeta")`
```

    measures = measure,
    tune_ps = ps_smote,
    terminator = term("none"),
    tuner = tnr("grid_search", resolution = 8)
  )
)
names(learns) = mlr3misc::map(learns, "id")
names(learns) 
```

## Benchmark `AutoTuner`

The `AutoTuner` is a fully tuned pipeline that behaves like a usual learner. 
For the tuning, we used 3-fold CV.
Now, we use the `benchmark` function to compare the tuned class imbalancy pipelines based on a 5 times repeated subsampling for the outer evaluation:

```{r, cache=TRUE}
outer_resampling = rsmp("holdout")
design = benchmark_grid(
  tasks = task,
  learners = learns,
  resamplings = outer_resampling
)
print(design)

set.seed(1)
# future::plan("multiprocess")
bmr = benchmark(design, store_models = TRUE)
```

```{r, echo = FALSE, eval = FALSE}
# compute and store benchmark result (or load it from file if it already exists)
if (!file.exists("imbalanced_data_bench.Rds")) {
  set.seed(1)
  # future::plan("multiprocess")
  bmr = benchmark(design, store_models = TRUE)
  saveRDS(bmr, file = "imbalanced_data_bench.Rds")
} else {
  bmr = readRDS("imbalanced_data_bench.Rds")
}
```

### Visualize benchmark results

```{r}
bmr$aggregate(measure)

> autoplot(bmr, measure)

Reviewer 2: I get an error in this line:

`Error in autoplot.BenchmarkResult(bmr, measure) : 
  Assertion on 'type' failed: Must be of type 'string', not 'MeasureBinaryimple/MeasureClassif/Measure/R6'.`

at the moment not sure what is the issue. Haven't used `mlr3viz so far.

EDIT: same error with mlr3 from CRAN

EDIT2: `autoplot(bmr, measure = measure)`

```

### Visualize the tuning path

With `store_models = TRUE` we allow the `benchmark` function to store each single model that was computed during tuning. 
Therefore, we can plot the tuning path of the best learner from the subsampling iterations:

```{r}
library(ggplot2)

> utune_path = bmr$learners$learner[[1]]$archive("params")

Reviewer 2: I get an error:

`Error in bmr$learners$learner[[1]]$archive("params") : 
  attempt to apply non-function`

Will look into it. Likely an issue should be posted

EDIT: same error with mlr3 from CRAN

Author: Yes, this used to work in a very old mlr3 version, seems to be a bug. I will do a workaround using `bmr$data$learner[[1]]$archive("params")` in the post. Could you post an issue in mlr3 with a minimal reproducible example?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
utune_path = bmr$data$learner[[1]]$archive("params")
```

> utune_gg = ggplot(utune_path, aes(x = undersample.ratio, y = classif.f_score)) +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
utune_gg = ggplot(utune_path, aes(x = undersample.ratio, y = classif.fbeta)) +
```

  geom_point(size = 3) + 
  geom_line() + ylim(0.9, 1)

> otune_path = bmr$learners$learner[[2]]$archive("params")

Reviewer 2: `otune_path = bmr$data$learner[[2]]$archive("params")`

Perhaps consider:

`tune_path = lapply(bmr$data$learner, function(x) x$archive("params"))`

and then `ggplot(tune_path[[1]]...`

> otune_gg = ggplot(otune_path, aes(x = oversample.ratio, y = classif.f_score)) +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
otune_gg = ggplot(otune_path, aes(x = oversample.ratio, y = classif.fbeta)) +
```

  geom_point(size = 3) + 
  geom_line() + ylim(0.9, 1)

> stune_path = bmr$learners$learner[[3]]$archive("params")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stune_path = bmr$data$learner[[3]]$archive("params")
```

> stune_gg = ggplot(stune_path, aes(x = smote.dup_size, y = classif.f_score, col = factor(smote.K))) +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stune_gg = ggplot(stune_path, aes(x = smote.dup_size, y = classif.fbeta, col = factor(smote.K))) +
```

  geom_point(size = 3) + 
  geom_line() + ylim(0.9, 1)

library(gridExtra)

> grid.arrange(utune_gg, otune_gg, stune_gg, nrow = 1)

Reviewer 2: Plot `stune_gg` is cramped due to legend.

I would do something like:

```
library(cowplot)
plot_grid(
  plot_grid(utune_gg, otune_gg, stune_gg + theme(legend.position = "none"), nrow = 1),
  get_legend(stune_gg + theme(legend.position = "bottom")),
  nrow = 2,
  rel_heights = c(5,1))
```
Or some other package your preffer

```

## Conclusion

> We left out a lot of details and other features.

Reviewer 2: Consider changing

"We left out"

 to be more positive
